# [gomod][]

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line link-fragments -->
- [Specifying modules to process](#specifying-modules-to-process)
- [Using fetched dependencies](#using-fetched-dependencies)
- [gomod flags](#gomod-flags)
- [Vendoring](#vendoring)
- [Understanding reported dependencies](#understanding-reported-dependencies)
- [Go 1.21+](#go-121-since-v050)

## Specifying modules [^modules] to process

Hermeto can be run as follows

```shell
hermeto fetch-deps \
  --source ./my-repo \
  --output ./hermeto-output \
  '<JSON input>'
```

where 'JSON input' is

```jsonc
{
  // "gomod" tells Hermeto to process a go module
  "type": "gomod",
  // path to the module (relative to the --source directory)
  // defaults to "."
  "path": "."
}
```

The main argument accepts alternative forms of input,
see [usage: Pre-fetch-dependencies][].

## Using fetched dependencies

See also [usage.md][] for a complete example of Hermeto usage.

Hermeto downloads the required modules into the deps/gomod/ subpath of the
output directory (`hermeto-output/deps/gomod`). Further down the file tree, at
`hermeto-output/deps/gomod/pkg/mod`, is a directory formatted as the Go
[module cache][]

```text
hermeto-output/deps/gomod/pkg/mod
└── cache
    └── download
        ├── github.com
        │   └── ...
        └── golang.org
            └── ...
```

To use this module cache during your build, set the GOMODCACHE environment
variable. Hermeto generates GOMODCACHE along with other expected environment
variables for you. See [usage: generate environment variables][] for more
details.

For more information on Go's environment variables

```shell
go help environment
```

Note that the deps/gomod/ layout described above does not apply when using
[vendoring][]. With vendoring enabled, deps/gomod/ will be an empty directory.
Instead, dependencies will be inside the vendor subdirectory of your module.

```text
my-repo
└── vendor
    ├── github.com
    │   └── ...
    ├── golang.org
    │   └── ...
    └── modules.txt
```

Go will use the vendored dependencies automatically, but it's not a bad idea to
set the environment variables generated by Hermeto anyway.

## gomod flags

The `hermeto fetch-deps` command accepts the following gomod-related flags

### --cgo-disable

Makes Hermeto internally disable [cgo][] while processing your Go modules.
Typically, you would want to use this flag if your modules *do* use C code and
Hermeto is failing to process them. Hermeto will not attempt to disable cgo in
your build (nor should you disable it yourself if you rely on C).

Disabling cgo should not prevent Hermeto from fetching your Go dependencies as
usual. Note that Hermeto will not make any attempts to fetch missing C
libraries. If required, you would need to get them through other means.

### Deprecated flags

- `--gomod-vendor` (deprecated in *v0.11.0*)
- `--gomod-vendor-check` (deprecated in *v0.11.0*)
- `--force-gomod-tidy` (deprecated in *v0.18.0*)

All of them are deprecated and will have no effect when set. They are only kept
for backwards compatibility reasons and will be removed in future releases.

## Vendoring

Go supports [vendoring][] to store the source code of all dependencies in the
vendor/ directory alongside your module. Before go 1.17, `go mod vendor` used to
download fewer dependencies than `go mod download`. Starting with 1.17, that is
no longer true.

We generally discourage vendoring, but Hermeto does support processing
repositories that contain vendored content. In this case, instead of a regular
prefetching of dependencies, Hermeto will only validate if the contents of the
vendor directory are consistent with what `go mod vendor` would produce.

## Understanding reported dependencies

Hermeto reports two (arguably three) different types of dependencies in the
generated SBOM for your Go modules

- **gomod** dependencies (Go modules)
- **go-package** dependencies (Go packages)

  - from the downloaded modules
  - from the [standard library](#stdlib-dependencies)

### gomod vs go-package

Best explained by the [Go modules documentation][]

> A module is a collection of packages that are released, versioned, and
> distributed together.

Your Go code imports individual *packages*, which come from *modules*. You might
import a single package from a module that provides many, but Go (and Hermeto)
has to download the whole module anyway. Effectively, modules are the smallest
"unit of distribution." Go does have the ability to list the individual packages
that your project imports. Hermeto makes use of this ability to report both the
downloaded modules and the required packages.

The list of **go-package** dependencies reported by Hermeto is the full set of
packages (transitively) required by your project.

*⚠ If any of your module dependencies has a
[missing checksum](#missing-checksums) in go.sum, the list may be incomplete.*

The list of **gomod** dependencies is the set of modules that Hermeto downloaded
to satisfy the go-package dependencies.

Note that versioning applies to modules, not packages. When reporting the
versions of Go packages, Hermeto uses the version of the module that provides
the package.

#### How to match a package to a module?

Borrowing from the [Go modules documentation][] again

> For example, the module "golang.org/x/net" contains a package in the directory
> "html". That package’s path is "golang.org/x/net/html"

The name of a package starts with the name of the module that provides it.

#### In the source tree, what are modules? What are packages?

To simplify a little

- Does the directory have a `go.mod` file? It's a module (provides packages).
- Does the directory have any `*.go` files? It's a package (is importable).
- Does it have both? It's both a module and a package.

### stdlib dependencies

Go is able to list even the standard library packages that your project imports.
Hermeto exposes these as **go-package** dependencies, with caveats. Hermeto uses
some version of Go to list the dependencies. This may or may not be the same
version that you will use to build your project. We do not presume that the
versions would be the same, hence why:

- the reported stdlib packages may be slightly inaccurate (e.g. new packages in
  new Go versions)
- the versions of stdlib packages are not reported

#### What identifies stdlib dependencies in the go-package list?

- does not have a version
- the name does not start with a hostname

  - `io/fs` - standard library
  - `golang.org/x/net` - external

### Missing checksums

Go stores the checksums of all your dependency modules in the [go.sum file][].
Go typically manages this file entirely on its own, but if any of your
dependencies do end up missing, it can cause issues for Hermeto and for Go
itself.

For Hermeto, a missing checksum means that the offending module gets downloaded
without checksum verification (or with partial checksum verification - Hermeto
does consult the [Go checksum database][]). Due to `go list` behavior, it also
means that the [go-package](#gomod-vs-go-package) dependency listing may be
incomplete[^2].

<!-- TODO: link hermeto:missing_hash:in_file once the taxonomy doc exists -->

For Go, a missing checksum will cause the `go build` or `go run` commands to
fail.

Please make sure to keep your go.sum file up to date, perhaps by incorporating
the `go mod tidy` command in your dev workflow.

### Go 1.21+ *(since v0.5.0)*

Starting with [Go 1.21][], Go changed the meaning of the `go 1.X` directive in
that it now specifies the [minimum required version][] of Go rather than a
suggested version as it originally did. The format of the version string in the
`go` directive now also includes the micro release and if you don't include the
micro release in your `go.qmod` file yourself (i.e. you only specify the
language release) Go will try to correct it automatically inside the file. Last
but not least, Go 1.21 also introduced a new keyword [`toolchain`][] to the
`go.mod` file. What this all means in practice for end users is that you may not
be able to process your `go.mod` file with an older version of Go (and hence
older hermeto) as you could in the past for various reasons. Many projects bump
their required Go toolchain's micro release as soon as it becomes available
upstream (i.e. not waiting for distributions to bundle them properly). This
caused problems in version *v0.5.0* because the container image's version simply
may not have been high enough to process a given project's `go.mod` file.
Therefore, version *v0.7.0* introduced a mechanism to always rely on the origin
0th release of a toolchain (e.g. 1.21.0) and use the `GOTOOLCHAIN=auto` setting
to instruct Go to fetch any toolchain as specified by the `go.mod` file
automatically, hence allowing us to keep up with frequent micro version bumps.
**Note that such a language version would still need to be officially marked as
supported by hermeto, i.e. we'd not allow Go to fetch e.g. a 1.22 toolchain if
the maximum supported Go version by hermeto were 1.21!**

[^modules]: You may have noticed a slight naming issue. You use the main argument,
  also called PKG, to specify a *module* to process. Even worse, Go has packages
  as well (see [gomod vs go-package](#gomod-vs-go-package)). What gives? As far
  as we know, most languages/package managers use the opposite naming. For
  example, in [Python][], modules are `*.py` files, packages are collections of
  modules. In [npm][], modules are directories/files you can `require()`,
  packages are the top-level directories with `package.json`. In Hermeto, we
  stick to the more common naming.

[^2]: When a module does not have a checksum in go.sum, the `go list` command
  returns only basic information and an error for the packages from said module.
  Go doesn't return any information about the dependencies of the affected
  packages. This can cause Hermeto to miss the transitive package dependencies
  of packages from checksum-less modules.

[usage: generate environment variables]: usage.md#generate-environment-variables-go
[usage: pre-fetch-dependencies]: usage.md#pre-fetch-dependencies-go
[usage.md]: usage.md

[`toolchain`]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-mod-file-toolchain
[cgo]: https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/cgo
[Go 1.21]: https://tip.golang.org/doc/go1.21
[Go checksum database]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#checksum-database
[gomod]: https://go.dev/ref/mod
[Go modules documentation]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#modules-overview
[go.sum file]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-sum-files
[minimum required version]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-mod-file-go
[module cache]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#module-cache
[npm]: https://docs.npmjs.com/about-packages-and-modules
[Python]: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html
[vendoring]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#vendoring
